De-duplicate HTML learn content (#38952)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn_web_development/getting_started/your_first_website/creating_the_content/index.md

{{PreviousMenuNext("Learn_web_development/Getting_started/Your_first_website/What_will_your_website_look_like", "Learn_web_development/Getting_started/Your_first_website/Styling_the_content", "Learn_web_development/Getting_started/Your_first_website")}}

> HTML (**H**yper**T**ext **M**arkup **L**anguage) is the code that is used to structure a web page and its content. For example, content could be structured as a set of paragraphs, a list of bulleted points, or some images and data tables. This article provides a basic understanding of HTML and its functionality, and shows you how to create the basic content for your first website.

Author: I am not sure I want to link to a much more complicated set of HTML information at this point. I think it would confuse or overwhelm the reader. We already defined it here, which is all they need for now.

## So what is HTML?

HTML is a _markup language_ that can be used to define content structure. HTML consists of a series of **{{Glossary("element", "elements")}}**, which you use to enclose (or wrap) text content to make it appear a certain way or act a certain way. For example, the following content will all be shown on the same line when displayed on a web page:

```plain
Instructions for life:
Eat
Sleep
Repeat
```

> If we enclose our text in the following {{Glossary("tag", "tags")}}, we can turn that single line into a paragraph and three bullet points:

Author: Good call; I used most of this

```html live-sample___basic-html
<p>Instructions for life:</p>

<ul>
  <li>Eat</li>
  <li>Sleep</li>
  <li>Repeat</li>
</ul>
```

This HTML will render as follows in a web browser:

{{EmbedLiveSample("basic-html", "100%", "140px")}}

HTML can make a word or image hyperlink to somewhere else, italicize words, embed an image or video in a web page, and so on.

### Anatomy of an HTML element

Let's explore our paragraph element a bit further:

```html
<p>Instructions for life:</p>
```

This consists of:

1. `<p>`: **The opening tag**, which contains the name of the element (in this case, `p`), wrapped in opening and closing **angle brackets**. This states where the element begins.
2. `Instructions for life`: **The content**, which in this case is just text.
3. `</p>`: **The closing tag**, which is the same as the opening tag, except with a _forward slash_ before the element name. This states where the element ends. Failing to add a closing tag is a common beginner error and can lead to strange results.

The opening tag, closing tag, and content together comprise the entire element.

> ### HTML Attributes

Author: Most of these headings no longer exist, but I have gone through and improved the consistency of the headings.

> ### HTML Attributes

Reviewer: Thanks, the new headings look great

Elements can also have attributes that look like the following:

```html
<p class="editorial">Instructions for life:</p>
```

Attributes contain extra information about the element that you don't want to appear in the actual content. Here, [`class`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/class) is the attribute _name_ and `editorial` is the attribute _value_. The `class` attribute allows you to give the element a non-unique identifier that can be used to target it with style information and other things.

There is always a space between the element name and each attribute. The attribute name is always wrapped in quotes, and preceded by an equals sign. Some elements can take many attributes, and some generally don't have any.

### Nesting elements

You can put elements inside other elements — this is called **nesting**. For example:

```html live-sample___nested-strong
<p>Instructions for <strong>life</strong>:</p>
```

This will cause the word `life` to be strongly emphasised, which is usually rendered in bold text by default:

{{EmbedLiveSample("nested-strong", "100%", "60px")}}

> You need to make sure that your elements are properly nested. In the example above, we opened the {{htmlelement("p")}} element first, then the {{htmlelement("strong")}} element; therefore, we have to close the {{htmlelement("strong")}} element first, then the {{htmlelement("p")}} element. The following is incorrect, and will probably lead to unexpected results:

Author: I've edited away the "above" instances.

## So what is HTML?

HTML is a _markup language_ consisting of a series of **{{Glossary("element", "elements")}}** used to wrap (or enclose) text content to define its structure and cause it to behave in a certain way.

Let's look at an example — the following content will all be shown on the same line when displayed on a web page, as it is not structured in any way:

```plain
Instructions for life:
Eat
Sleep
Repeat
```

> If we wrap this content with the following elements, we can turn that single line into a paragraph ({{htmlelement("p")}}) and three bullet points ({{htmlelement("li")}}):

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
If we wrap this content with the following HTML elements, we can turn that single line into a paragraph ({{htmlelement("p")}}) and three bullet points ({{htmlelement("li")}}):
```

```html live-sample___basic-html
<p>Instructions for life:</p>

<ul>
  <li>Eat</li>
  <li>Sleep</li>
  <li>Repeat</li>
</ul>
```

This HTML will render as follows in a web browser:

{{EmbedLiveSample("basic-html", "100%", "140px")}}

As well as structuring text, HTML has many other uses — making text or images link to other web pages, embedding images or videos, creating data tables, and so on.

## Creating your first HTML document

> Let's see how individual elements are combined to form an HTML page. In this section you'll create a basic HTML file and take a look at what it's made up of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see how individual elements are combined to form an HTML page. In this section, you'll create a basic HTML file and take a look at what it's made up of.
```

1. Inside your `web-projects` folder, create another new folder called `first-website`.

> 2. Inside `first-website`, Create a new file called `index.html`, and insert the following code into the file exactly as shown:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Inside `first-website`, create a new file called `index.html`, and insert the following code into the file exactly as shown:
```

Here, we have the following:

- `<!doctype html>` — The [doctype](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Doctype) is a required preamble. In the mists of time, when HTML was young (around 1991/92), doctypes were meant to act as links to a set of rules that the HTML page had to follow to be considered good HTML, which could mean automatic error checking and other useful things. However, these days, they don't do much and are basically just needed to make sure your document behaves correctly. That's all you need to know for now.

> - `<html></html>` — the {{htmlelement("html")}} element. This element wraps all the content on the entire page and is sometimes known as the **root element**. It also includes the `lang` attribute, which sets the primary language of the document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<html></html>` — The {{htmlelement("html")}} element. This element wraps all the content on the entire page and is sometimes known as the **root element**. It also includes the `lang` attribute, which sets the primary language of the document.
```
- There are three more instances of "the" after the dash in this list 
- Why not say "The {{htmlelement("html")}} element wraps..."
- Just like we linked the first instance of "elements", we could link "attribute" - i think this is the first occurrence

Author: All good ideas — I've done them all.

- `<head></head>` — the {{htmlelement("head")}} element. This element acts as a container for all the stuff you want to include on the HTML page that _isn't_ the content you are showing to your page's viewers. This includes things like {{Glossary("keyword", "keywords")}} and a page description that you want to appear in search results, {{glossary("CSS")}} to style the content, character set declarations, and more.

> - `<meta charset="utf-8">` — This element sets the character set your document should use to UTF-8, which includes most characters from the vast majority of written languages. Essentially, it can now handle any textual content you might put on it. There is no reason not to set this, and it can help avoid some problems later on.

Reviewer: Should we link to https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/UTF-8?

Author: good call; done.

- `<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">` — This [viewport element](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSSOM_view/Viewport_concepts#mobile_viewports) ensures the page renders at the width of the browser viewport, preventing mobile browsers from rendering pages wider than the viewport and then shrinking them down.

> - `<title></title>` — the {{htmlelement("title")}} element. This sets the title of your page, which is the title that appears in the browser tab the page is loaded in. It is also used to describe the page when you bookmark/favorite it.

Reviewer: Similarly
```suggestion
- `<title></title>` — The {{htmlelement("title")}} element sets the title of your page, which is the title that appears in the browser tab the page is loaded in. It is also used to describe the page when you bookmark/favorite it.
```

## Embedding images

Let's turn our attention to the {{htmlelement("img")}} element:

```html
<img src="" alt="My test image" />
```

This embeds an image into our page in the position it appears. It does this via the `src` (source) attribute, which contains the path to the image file we want to embed.

We have also included an `alt` (alternative) attribute. In the [`alt` attribute](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/img#authoring_meaningful_alternate_descriptions), you specify descriptive text for users who cannot see the image, possibly because of the following reasons:

1. They are visually impaired. Users with significant visual impairments often use tools called screen readers to read out the alt text to them.
2. Something has gone wrong, causing the image not to display. If the `src` attribute does not contain a valid path to an image, the alt text will be displayed instead:

   ![The words: my test image](alt-text-example.png)

> The alt text you write should provide the reader with enough information to have a good idea of what the image conveys. In this example, our current text of "My test image" is no good at all. A much better alternative for our Firefox logo would be "The Firefox logo: a flaming fox surrounding the Earth."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The alt text you write should provide the reader with enough information to have a good idea of what the image conveys. In this example, our current text of "My test image" is not good because it doesn't convey descriptive information about the image. A much better alternative for our Firefox logo would be "The Firefox logo: a flaming fox surrounding the Earth."
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Elements such as `<img>` have no content or closing tag and are therefore called **empty** (or **{{glossary("void element", "void")}}**) elements. They are sometimes written with a **trailing slash** at the end of their single tag (`<img />`), but this is optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Elements such as `<img>` have no content or closing tag, and are therefore called **empty** (or **{{glossary("void element", "void")}}**) elements. They are sometimes written with a **trailing slash** at the end of their single tag (`<img />`), but this is optional.
```

Let's get your image displaying now.

1. Inside the `first-website` folder, create a new folder called `images`, and put the image you chose in the previous example inside this folder.
2. Inside the `<img>` tag's `src` attribute value, enter the path to your image. It is inside a folder called `images`, which is inside the same directory as your `index.html` file, therefore the path will be `images/` plus the name of your image. For example, if your image was called `firefox-icon.png`, your `src` attribute would look like this: `src="images/firefox-icon.png"`.

> 3. replace the `alt` attribute value — `My test image` — with some text that better describes your image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Replace the `alt` attribute value — `My test image` — with some text that better describes your image.
```

## Creating your first HTML document

> Now we'll show you how individual elements are combined to form an entire HTML page. Let's create a basic HTML file, and have a look at what it is made up of:

Author: I used this suggestion, very nice.

Each item inside the lists is put inside an {{htmlelement("li")}} (list item) element.

> For example, if we wanted to turn part of the following paragraph fragment into a list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if we wanted to turn part of the following paragraph fragment into a list:
```

> ```html

Reviewer: Can't edit that line but on line 182, a colon is needed:
"We could modify the markup to this:"

If you get stuck, you can always compare your work with our [finished example code](https://github.com/mdn/beginner-html-site/blob/main/index.html) on GitHub.

> > [!NOTE]
> > Here, we have only really scratched the surface of HTML. You'll learn a lot more in our [Structuring content with HTML](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Core/Structuring_content) Core module later on in the course.

Reviewer: We probably don't need a callout for this text. I haven't pointed out all instances, but might help to review all Notes earlier on the page to check if they do need to be callouts.
```suggestion
In this article, we've only scratched the surface of HTML. You'll learn a lot more in our [Structuring content with HTML](/en-US/docs/Learn_web_development/Core/Structuring_content) Core module later in the course.
```

Reviewer: Thanks
